Earth Dome Research Pack 2025
NMoQ 50th Anniversary Exhibition
50th Anniversary Exhibition – Curatorial Statement
Working Title:
50th Anniversary of the National Museum of Qatar
Main Message: The National Museum of Qatar has a long and rich history that reflects its cultural and political significance as well as its sentimental connection with the different communities in Qatar.
Curatorial Statement:
The National Museum of Qatar, throughout its long history, has been an important landmark and an example of the State’s commitment to cultural development. Being one of the first museums of its kind in the Arabian Gulf, the National Museum of Qatar has left an impact on the cultural initiatives in the region. For the residents and nationals of Qatar alike, the museum serves as a symbol of national identity and pride.
The idea of establishing the Qatar National Museum (QNM) was initiated by the directives of His Highness Sheikh Khalifa bin Hamad Al Thani in 1972. The museum was designed to be a distinguished center for collecting and displaying the artifacts, heritage, and history of Qatar, as well as showcasing items that represent the values, customs, traditions, and identity of the Qatari people. Additionally, the museum aims to describe Qatar's natural environment and history, both on land and sea and in rural and urban settings, provided a space where visitors can both enjoy and learn.
On 23 June 1975, the Qatar National Museum was established in the Sheikh Abdullah bin Jassim Palace under the patronage of Sheikh Khalifa bin Hamad. The museum held a special place for Qataris and residents until it was closed in 2004 for restoration. The old museum consisted of five halls: the Old Ruler's Palace, the State Museum known as the State Palace, the Lake, the Botanical Garden, and the Maritime Museum. In 1980, QNM was awarded the Aga Khan International Award for the restoration work carried out on the Old Palace. For the 21 years of its operation, QNM welcomed esteemed visitors, world leaders, and dignitaries and was a place of many leisurely visits, as well as scientific research.
In 2004, QNM closed to undergo construction for the new National Museum of Qatar, which incorporated a new building designed by French architect Jean Nouvel. The expansion of the museum was part of His Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani in showcasing the local culture in a space comparable to international standards. Under the patronage of Her Excellency Sheikha Al Mayassa bint Hamad Al Thani, a steering committee was created to expand the narrative and content of the museum. The National Museum of Qatar was inaugurated on 28 March 2019 by HE Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani. Its architecture, inspired by the desert rose, incorporates the Old Palace into its design, blending the past with the future.
The exhibition is a multi-sited celebration of the museum’s 50-year history and tells its complete story. In gallery 13, the narrative unfolds chronologically, first introducing visitors to QNM and the significance of the aream and later NMoQ. Visitors learn about the decision made by HE Sheikh Khalifa Al Thani in 1972 after his accession, that a museum should be built that preserves the Qatari way of life before it was lost due to the country’s rapid social and economic changes. The old palace, which visitors are familiar with today, is contextualised not only as the former home of the Al Thani family and a place of governance but also as the location that was chosen by Sheikh Khalifa to be restored as the country’s first museum. At the core of the exhibition, there are personal stories of individuals who are part of the museum’s legacy, along with testimonials from visitors throughout its 50-year history, highlighting the museum as a significant space for the different generations and multicultural residents. The exhibition explores themes related to the development of the cultural landscape of the country and the evolving role of museums. The exhibition also features documents and photographs related to the early stages of the museum's establishment, as well as a recreation of iconic exhibits from QNM, such as the earth dome and the aquarium. The old palace will feature site-responsive installations, while the baraha will have an immersive pavilion that features an animation that tells the museum's 50-year history.
Old Palace to Qatar National Museum
Converting the old Amiri Palace into a museum required extensive restoration and adaptation. Original structures were preserved where possible, while new buildings, such as the Museum of the State and the Marine Museum and Aquarium, were sensitively integrated into the complex. Modern materials, including reinforced concrete, were used
alongside traditional ones, ensuring structural integrity while maintaining the historical ambiance. The museum was innagurated by Sheikh Khalifa Al Thani in 1975.
The museum's objective is to educate visitors about the history and traditions of Qatari life. Exhibits cover various aspects, from geological and ecological displays to archaeological and ethnographical artifacts. The museum effectively used modern communication techniques, such as films and interactive displays, to enhance visitors' understanding of Qatar's dual heritage of desert and sea life. The museum collection and planned exhibits could not be accommodated in the buildings of the palace alone, and therefore two additional structures were constructed, the Museum of the State and the Marine Museum and Aquarium. The Museum of the State required a three-story structure, thus presenting the problem of integrating a building of that scale into the context of the existing complex. This problem was met with a sensitive solution. The height of the building was reduced by sinking one floor below ground. This device allows the Inner Majlis, directly across from the new building, to dominate the complex as before, since it remains the tallest and most architecturally expressive structure. Reflecting traditional forms, the arcaded front facade of the Museum of the State harmonizes with the arcades of the inner majlis. The other facades of the new structure are simply treated so as not to overpower their surroundings. The building is of reinforced concrete construction with exterior walls finished with a white gypsum-cement rendering.
The museum complex consists of four components 1- The old amiri palace, which forms the nucleus and setting of the complex 2- the Museum of the state, a new building constructed along the north wall of the palace complex 3- A Maritime Museum and Aquarium, set at one corner 4- An Artificial Lagoon lying to the east of the palace between it and the corniche
Earth dome with measurements:
Location:
The first thing a visitor sees in the State Palace (New Palace) is the earth dome, which is opposite to the main door of the State Palace. Which was opened by Sheikh Khalifa bin Hamad Al Thani with the Qatar National Museum in 1975 AD.
Video:
The visitors view the bottom center of the dome. The video is about the formation of the earth with an audio using Quranic verse about the origin of the earth.
The emergence of Qatar over millions of years (from when it was an island and became a peninsula)
Shows the great dust cloud theory and the theory of continental displacement and the formation of the Red Sea, the Arabian Gulf, and the Zagros Mountains in Iran.